Fall from grace
Corruption at PU should prompt a reassessment of higher education
 Bookmark and Share  Bookmark                 
0
 logo-kp 

 
APR 11 -

On its website, Purbanchal University (PU), an autonomous public institution, boasts aspiring to achieve "higher academic statures in every coming day, month and year". In reality, the PU is mired in controversies. In December 2010, the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority (CIAA) began investigations on the University after politicians and professors lodged a complaint accusing officials of misappropriating funds worth over Rs 400 million while constructing a new building in Morang. Top university officials were also accused of receiving bribes, flouting regulations while providing affiliations to colleges and pocketing funds while procuring goods. The CIAA subsequently suspended six officials—Vice-Chancellor, Registrar, Exam Controller, Chief Accountant, Humanities and Social Science Dean and the Deputy Dean of Science Department—last week. This is the first time so many senior university officials have been suspended at one time.

According to a report by a high-level commission formed by the Ministry of Education, the university's main sources of income are affiliation charges, examination fees and fees charged for introducing new courses. But instead of abiding by the University rule of first forming a feasibility study team to research the prospects of new courses and letting the Working Committee decide, PU provided affiliation to many colleges and permission to conduct new courses through a mere letter. In September 2010, a total of 32 colleges received university affiliation within 20 days. The report also documents 'political pressure' to provide affiliation to one Nona Koirala Media College in Biratnagar. Furthermore, the report states that it has been years since an internal or external audit was carried out at PU. The University also does not have a single permanent professor. Examination papers are set and examined by people chosen by the administration and tests are held in private colleges that provide the highest amount of money in return.

Sadly, the PU's state of affairs is characteristic of the functioning of many educational institutions in Nepal. Many lecturers moonlight as instructors elsewhere, run colleges themselves and are seldom found at the university. Students are the biggest losers. The suspension of officials at the PU, therefore, should prompt a reassessment of higher education in the country.

Coming back to PU, the government should first fill in posts left vacant. This will help avert any difficulty students might face concerning their course and examinations. Then, the government should conduct a fiscal review of PU's transactions. Once the actual extent of financial misappropriation has been ascertained, severe measures must be taken against implicated officials. In the long run, the University must develop a merit-based system to attract qualified academicians. Additionally, all colleges that have received affiliation from PU must be monitored for their capacities.

